# Modelling Overweight Development in Utrecht: An Agent Based Simulation Study

Overweight and obesity is one of the main health threats to millions of people worldwide (World Health Organization, 2021). People with a higher body-mass index (BMI) are more prone to develop cardiovascular diseases, diabetes and even certain forms of cancer (World Health Organization, 2021). In 2021, over half of the adult population in the Netherlands was classified as overweight, with a BMI of 25 or greater, while 14% were considered obese, with a BMI of 30 or higher (CBS, 2022). As a result of this, the Dutch government has issued a national prevention strategy (Ministerie van Volksgezondheid, Welzijn en Sport, 2018) with its goal to reduce overweight to 38% or less by 2040. The government has proposed several strategies to fulfil the goal of reducing overweight, such as cutting taxes on healthy fruits and vegetables (Ministerie van Volksgezondheid, Welzijn en Sport, 2018). However, a recent analysis shows that overweight has barely reduced since the start of this strategy in 2018 (Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek, 2022, p. 20). Therefore, governmental strategies to reduce overweight must be improved to be successful in the near future. 

One approach to model overweight and the potential consequences of governmental interventions is agent-based modelling (ABM; Auchincloss & Diez Roux, 2008). ABM is a simulation-based modelling approach that can model interactions of spatial, temporal and social aspects of a society with regard to a phenomenon such as overweight and obesity. Over time, agents (e.g., households in a city) can develop certain characteristics and behaviours that shape their surroundings, which in turn shape the agent’s characteristics and behaviour in the future. This way, ABM is an effective way to model the complex multi-level interactions and feedback loops which shape phenomena such as obesity in society.

In the past years, ABM has been increasingly used for modelling obesity and overweight (Bruzzone et al., 2012; Giabbanelli et al., 2021; Li et al., 2018; Orr et al., 2016). For example, Orr et al. (2016) modelled racial disparities in obesity over multiple generations of agents and found that school quality has a strong influence on the inequality between communities in obesity over a larger period of time, while the influence of food store quality or sport facilities barely changed over time. This shows that, in contrast to other methods like linear regression, ABM is an important method to model the complex interactions over a large period of time (Auchincloss & Diez Roux, 2008). Put differently, ABM is a novel, yet validated approach to investigate the development of overweight within a population. 

Therefore, in this case study, an ABM will be used to model the development of BMI in the Dutch city of Utrecht. As one of the biggest cities of the country, Utrecht’s inhabitants are people with many different backgrounds and characteristics. Thereby, the city represents an interesting case for modelling overweight in The Netherlands. By combining real-world data on population density, BMI, and income, this study addresses an important limitation of earlier studies, which often did not use real data in the calibrations of their model (Giabbanelli et al., 2021). Furthermore, this research contributes to the current state of the art literature in two main ways. First, it extends upon the growing body of scientific literature on the use of ABM to model overweight. And second, it contributes to the understanding of the development of obesity in the Dutch urban context with and without interference from governmental authorities. 

Specifically, the simulation will model the development of overweight in Utrecht over 28 years (2012 to 2040), with a calibration period of the first 8 years. Additionally, it will examine the potential impact of a tax increase on fast food stores in Utrecht. The hypothesis is that increasing taxes on fast food will reduce the probability of consumption of unhealthy, high-calorie foods, leading to a decrease in overall calorie intake and potentially improved BMI for the population in the simulated environment from 2020 onwards. This is supported by the evidence that taxing unhealthy food and drinks can result in reduced consumption and improved population health outcomes. For instance, after Mexico introduced a 10% tax on fast food in 2014, there was a 6% reduction in the purchase of taxed food and a decrease in average daily calorie intake, leading to improved population health (Bonilla-Chacin et al., 2016).
